Title: Tree Search With Predictions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.27490v1

Published Time: Thu, 28 May 2026 00:11:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Tree Search With Predictions 

Michael Dinitz ∗

Department of Computer Science Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21218 

mdinitz@cs.jhu.edu 

Bob Dong 

Department of Computer Science Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21218 

bdong9@jh.edu 

# Abstract 

“Algorithms with predictions”, or “learning-augmented algorithms”, has proved to be an extremely useful paradigm for combining machine learning with traditional algorithms. One of the textbook settings for this is searching a sorted array. Without a prediction, classical binary search takes O(log n) queries, while with a prediction we can use “doubling binary search” to find the target key using O(log η)

queries, where η is the error of the prediction measured as the absolute value of the difference between the true location and the predicted location. Since an array is just a path graph, in this paper we ask whether similar bounds can be achieved for search on even slightly more general graphs: trees. We show first that the high-level answer is “no”: there is no search algorithm that uses O(log η) queries, where 

η is now the graph distance between the predicted location and the true location. However, as our main result, we show that such bounds can be achieved on trees which are “path-like” in that they have low pathwidth . In particular, we prove that there is a search algorithm which uses at most O(k log η) queries, where k is the pathwidth of the tree. We also prove a lower bound showing that our algorithm has existentially optimal query complexity. Finally, we show experimentally, on real-life inputs, that our algorithm has query complexity which is notably better than the simple non-prediction-based algorithm. 

# 1 Introduction 

Traditional algorithms tend to optimize for the worst case, leading to extremely impressive worst-case performance but somewhat lacking performance in the usual case. On the other hand, approaches based on machine learning often have extremely impressive performance in the usual case (at least if the training data are close to the true data) while suffering from extremely poor worst-case behavior (e.g., if the training data comes from a completely different distribution than we see in our real application). An important framework that attempts to get the best of both is the “algorithms with predictions” framework, also called “learning-augmented algorithms” or “algorithms with machine-learned advice”. In this framework we are given a problem-dependent “prediction” (possibly learned by a machine learning system), and want to do well if the prediction is accurate but also have good worst-case bounds if the prediction is extremely inaccurate. See Section 1.2 for more discussion. A paradigmatic example of this framework is searching a sorted array. This problem is extremely simple and has an extremely simple solution, so it is a standard warm-up and motivation for this area; it is in fact the very first example considered in the survey of the area by Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii [2021]. In the basic search problem we are given an array A of n elements, each of which is from some totally ordered universe U , where A is in sorted order with respect to the ordering of U . We are also given a target element t, and the goal is to find which index of A contains t, i.e., 

> ∗Funded in part by NSF award 2228995. Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.27490v1 [cs.DS] 26 May 2026

find the value of i such that A[i] = t. Given t, let α(t) denote this value of i. The textbook solution to this is binary search, which finds α(t) in O(log n) queries. But what if we are also given a prediction of the correct location, i.e., we are also given an index 

ˆα(t)? Then it turns out that the folklore “doubling binary search” algorithm (originally proposed in an infinite search context by Bentley and Yao [1976]) achieves query complexity O(log η), where 

η = |α(t) − ˆα(t)| is the error of the prediction. Note that 0 ≤ η ≤ n, so this is never (asymptotically) worse than the non-prediction O(log n) bound and, if η is small, can be notably better. This type of bound, which degrades in a controlled way with the prediction error, is often called a “smoothness” guarantee, and is the gold standard for algorithms with predictions. This is in contrast, for example, to algorithms which only give tradeoffs between “consistency” (performance when the prediction error η = 0 ) and “robustness” (performance in the worst case when η is unbounded or as large as possible). This framework has become extremely popular and is surprisingly powerful; see Section 1.2 for more discussion of related work. There is even significant work building directly from this binary search example by considering more complicated types of predictions [Dinitz et al., 2024]. However, one natural generalization of searching a sorted array has not yet been explored: searching objects more complicated than arrays. To motivate this, note that an equivalent formulation of the search problem on a sorted array is a search problem on paths . In particular, suppose that we are given a path graph P = ( V, E ) and are trying to find a particular target node t ∈ V , and are given a prediction s ∈ V . When we query some point x ∈ V , we are told which neighbor of x is on the unique path from x to t, i.e., we are told which direction on the path t is from x. Our goal is to find (query) t with as few queries as possible. It is trivial to see that this is precisely the problem of searching a sorted array. And interpreted in the language of graphs, we get that the doubling binary search algorithm has query complexity 

O(log dist( s, t )) , where dist( s, t ) denotes the graph distance between our prediction s and the true target node t.But now by thinking of an array as a path graph, there is a natural generalization to other types of graphs. A particularly obvious generalization is to trees , since in trees it is always true that for any node x there is a unique neighbor of x that is on the (unique) path from x to t. So on trees we have the exact same problem, which we now define formally: 

Definition 1.1. In the Search on Trees problem we are given a tree T = ( V, E ), and there is an unknown target node t ∈ V . In the prediction setting we are also given a prediction s ∈ V . We can query any node x ∈ V , and that query will return the unique neighbor of x that is on the path from x

to t. The goal is to find (query) t using as few queries as possible. 

Without predictions, there is an obvious generalization of traditional binary search to trees, where instead of querying the median of the remaining interval we query the centroid of the remaining subtree. This obviously has query complexity O(log n), like in the path/array setting [Onak and Parys, 2006]. But what about the prediction setting? Is there an algorithm that, similar to the array setting, only requires O(log dist( s, t )) queries? If not, what query complexity can be achieved? Are there at least simple classes of trees where O(log dist( s, t )) queries is possible? 

1.1 Our Results 

In this paper we answer these questions. We first show that trees are fundamentally different than paths, in that no algorithm can achieve query complexity of O(log dist( s, t )) . However, as our main result we show that trees which are “path-like” do allow for this type of query complexity. In particular, we design such an algorithm for trees with bounded pathwidth , a well-studied definition of how path-like a graph is. We give theoretical bounds on its query complexity, and also show experimentally on real life data that our theory matches reality: our algorithm significantly outperforms the traditional centroid-based algorithm when our predictions are reasonably accurate on low-pathwidth trees. Finally, we prove a matching lower bound which shows that our dependence on the pathwidth and on 

dist( s, t ) is existentially optimal (no algorithm can have better dependence on all trees). 21.1.1 Initial Lower Bound 

We begin with the bad news: when we generalize from paths to trees, it is no longer possible to get 

O(log dist( s, t )) queries. 

Theorem 1.2. There is no algorithm (deterministic or randomized) for the Search on Trees problem that has expected query complexity O(log dist( s, t )) for every prediction s ∈ V and target t ∈ V .

This theorem turns out to be quite simple to prove. Informally, consider the complete binary tree with 

n leaves. Then given a prediction s which is a leaf, at least Ω( n) other leaves are at least Ω(log n)

away from s. Distinguishing which is the true target must take at least Ω(log n) queries for some target through a standard information-theoretic argument. So in this case the number of needed queries is at least Ω(dist( s, t )) , exponentially worse than our goal of O(log dist( s, t )) and essentially matching the trivial algorithm of just following the query path. It turns out that this theorem is also a corollary of our stronger lower bound (Theorem 1.4), so rather than the direct proof sketched above we provide the proof as a corollary in Appendix B. 

1.1.2 Bounded pathwidth: upper bound 

Fortunately, we show that Theorem 1.2 is not the end of the story: many trees actually do admit algorithms with low query complexity. In particular, we show that trees with bounded pathwidth 

admit such algorithms. We define pathwidth formally in Section 2, but it is a standard way of quantifying how close a graph is to a path, in essentially the same way that treewidth measures how close a graph is to a tree. Paths (and slight extensions to paths like caterpillars) have pathwidth 

1, while on the other extreme the complete binary tree has pathwidth Θ(log n). Every other tree has pathwidth somewhere between these two extremes. Note that the pathwidth is well-defined for any graph, but we will only apply it to trees. This is not particularly unusual; there is significant previous work (which we draw on) studying the special properties of trees with low pathwidth (we will particularly use results from Suderman [2004]). More formally, as our main result we prove the following theorem in Section 3. 

Theorem 1.3. There is a deterministic algorithm for the Search on Trees problem which, when given a tree T = ( V, E ) of pathwidth k and a prediction s ∈ V , finds the unknown target t ∈ V using at most O(k log dist( s, t )) queries. 

To get some intuition for our algorithm, consider the special case of a caterpillar tree. Formally, a caterpillar is a tree in which there is a special path (usually called the spine ) such that every node not in the spine is at distance 1 from the spine. So a caterpillar is almost a path, and indeed like a path has pathwidth 1. We claim that there is an obvious algorithm for solving the Search on Trees problem in a caterpillar. Given a prediction s, let s′ be the closest node to s on the spine (so either s itself or the neighbor of s that is on the spine). Now run the classic doubling binary search algorithm for a path on the spine, starting from s′. If t is on the spine then this clearly takes at most 

O(log dist( s′, t )) = O(log dist( s, t )) queries. If t is not on the spine, then in O(log dist( s′, t ) − 1) 

queries we will have queried the neighbor t′ of t that is on the spine, which will then point us directly to t. So in either case, we use at most O(log dist( s, t )) queries. Clearly this can be extended to other related graphs. For example, we can clearly handle the (less standard) definition of a caterpillar where instead of every spine node being adjacent to a set of leaves, each spine node is adjacent to a set of arbitrarily long paths (i.e., deleting the spine results in a collection of disjoint paths). In these types of caterpillars we simply start from s′ being the closest node on the spine to s (not necessarily a neighbor of s), and then when we find t′ we run doubling binary search again on the path which contains t. In other words, the key feature that we need is a “spine” path on which we can run doubling binary search, and then we can recursively search whatever (hopefully simpler) tree the target node is located in off of the spine. It turns out that trees of bounded pathwidth are known to have a path with precisely these properties: it was shown by Suderman [2004] that any tree of pathwidth k has what they call a “main path” which, when deleted, leaves us with a disjoint collection of subtrees all of which have pathwidth at most k − 1. So we can treat this main path as a spine, doing doubling binary search on it to figure out which subtree contains the target t, and then recursively search the resulting k − 1-pathwidth subtree. Once properly formalized, it is not hard to see that we do at most k doubling binary searches, each of which takes at most O(log dist( s, t )) queries, for a total query complexity of O(k log dist( s, t )) as claimed. 3Robustness. It is common in the algorithms with predictions literature to focus on robustness : if the prediction is arbitrarily bad, then we would like our algorithm to still be no worse (asymptotically) than the best algorithm without predictions. In many problems it is highly nontrivial to get both robustness and consistency (good performance when the prediction is exactly accurate). But we note that in the Search on Trees problem, we can get robustness “for free” by simply running the centroid algorithm in parallel with our algorithm. That is, we can run each algorithm separately, and stop whenever the first one finishes. This gives us a query complexity of O(min(log n, k log dist( s, t ))) .So for the remainder of the paper we do not discuss robustness. 

Running Time. We focus on query complexity rather than running time, following the lead of Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii [2021] and Dinitz et al. [2024]. There are multiple justifications for this. First, queries might be much more expensive than computation; think of a case where each query itself requires either a significant amount of computation, or something like a physical experiment (when we do search in, for example, a scientific discovery context). Second, our search algorithms can be computed offline : given the tree T , we can compute ahead of time the policy that we will use for any given prediction s. This takes time, of course, but can be done before seeing any queries. Then when we see queries, following the policy is as simple as following a search tree, and our query time is equal to our query complexity. So we can essentially trade increased “preprocessing time” for decreased “query time”. But even with these justifications, one might be skeptical of our algorithm if its running time were astronomical (e.g., exponential). Fortunately, our algorithm turns out to have polynomial running time, allowing us to run relatively large-scale experiments (see Section 4). The most time-intensive step is computing the hierarchy of spines, so in Appendix D we discuss explicitly how to do this step efficiently. 

1.1.3 Pathwidth lower bound 

A natural followup question to Theorem 1.3 is whether there are matching lower bounds. Most notably: do we actually need to have query complexity Ω( k log dist( s, t )) ? Note that Theorem 1.2 does not give such a bound, since the complete binary tree has pathwidth Θ(log n) and requires 

Θ(log n) queries on pairs at distance Θ(log n), and so it only implies lower bounds of Ω( k) (purely as a function of k) or Ω

 k  

> log k

log dist( s, t )



(as a function of both k and log dist( s, t )). We improve this lower bound by showing through a more complicated class of trees that our upper bound is tight: no algorithm can always have query complexity o(k log dist( s, t )) , even if we allow randomized algorithms and expected query complexity. 

Theorem 1.4. There is no algorithm (deterministic or randomized) for the Search on Trees problem that has expected query complexity o(k log dist (s, t )) for every tree T = ( V, E ) of pathwidth k,prediction s ∈ V , and target t ∈ V .

The details of this construction and proof can be found in Appendix B. While our construction is more complicated than the simple complete binary tree, it is intuitively just a “stretched” version of such a tree. The reason that the complete binary tree does not give such a lower bound is that each “spine” in the recursive call is just a single node (the root of the subtree), so we only need one query at every level rather than log dist( s, t ). To get our desired lower bound, we simply have to “stretch” each spine at each level to be longer. Carefully balancing parameters leads to Theorem 1.4. 

1.2 Related Work Algorithms with Predictions. The algorithms with predictions setting has become quite popular, so there is significant work in this framework for a variety of problems and models. We refer the interested reader to the early survey of Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii [2021] as well as the invaluable website which keeps track of the area [Lindermayr and Megow, 2022]. It is usually considered to have been initiated by the seminal work of Lykouris and Vassilvitskii [2021], who formally defined the setting and introduced the popular notions of robustness and consistency. Since then, it has been studied in settings as diverse as online algorithms (ski rental [Purohit et al., 2018], scheduling [Lattanzi et al., 2020], knapsack [Im et al., 2021], set cover [Bamas et al., 2020], and more), speeding up combinatorial algorithms [Dinitz et al., 2021], dynamic algorithms [van den Brand et al., 2024], mechanism design [Agrawal et al., 2024], and many more. 4Most related to our paper is the survey of Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii [2021], which first introduced the binary search problem in the predictions context. Also related is the work of Dinitz et al. [2024], which generalized the binary search problem in a different way: rather than to more general graphs (like us), they stay in the path but allow for distributional predictions. Extending our results to distributional predictions is an interesting problem that we leave to future work. 

Search in trees and graphs. As mentioned, there has been significant work extending binary search on paths to trees and even more general graphs in the non-predictions context. This was kicked off by Onak and Parys [2006], who among other results proved that the centroid algorithm (discussed earlier) has O(log n) query complexity. A further important generalization was to the “Search Trees on Trees” (STT) problem, where we are given a tree (like in our settings) and are given a distribution over the nodes in that tree, and are asked to compute an optimal search strategy (equivalently, an optimal search tree ) for that tree and distribution. Note that this is like a “distributional prediction”, except the assumption is that the given distribution is perfectly accurate. For example, Berendsohn et al. [2023] showed that the centroid algorithm (mentioned earlier) not only has O(log n) query complexity, but given a distribution over the nodes the natural weighted generalization is a 2-approximation of the optimal search strategy and can be computed extremely quickly. There has also been work on generalizing to graphs beyond trees [Emamjomeh-Zadeh et al., 2016]. 

# 2 Preliminaries and Notation 

Given a tree T , we denote its vertex set by V (T ) and its edge set by E(T ). For vertices u, v ∈ V (T ),let dist T (u, v ) denote the length of the unique simple path between u and v in T . If P is a path in T

and u, v ∈ V (P ), then dist P (u, v ) denotes the number of edges on the subpath of P between u and 

v.We first formalize the oracle model used throughout the paper. 

Definition 2.1 (Direction oracle) . Let T = ( V (T ), E (T )) be a tree, and let t ∈ V (T ) be a hidden target vertex. The direction oracle for t is the map 

dir t : V (T ) → V (T ) ∪ { here }

defined as follows. If v = t, then dir t(v) = here . Otherwise, dir t(v) is the unique neighbor u of v

that lies on the simple path from v to t in T . An oracle query at v returns dir t(v).

In the search problem, the algorithm is given the tree T and a prediction s ∈ V (T ) for the target, but it does not know the target t. The algorithm may adaptively query vertices of T through the direction oracle dir t. The algorithm succeeds when it outputs t; equivalently, it may stop once it queries a vertex v with dir t(v) = here . The query complexity of an algorithm is the number of oracle queries it makes. When the target is clear from context, we write dir instead of dir t.We will use the following standard path-search primitive. 

Fact 2.2 (Exponential search on a path) . Let P be a simple path, let a ∈ V (P ) be a starting vertex, and let x ∈ V (P ) be an unknown target vertex. Suppose that each query to a vertex v ∈ V (P )

returns here if v = x, and otherwise indicates which of the two directions along P contains x. Then there exists an adaptive algorithm, namely exponential (doubling binary) search, that identifies x

using O log(dist P (a, x ) + 1)  oracle queries [Bentley and Yao, 1976]. 

Next we recall the definition of pathwidth. The standard definition can be found in Appendix A. For our purposes, we use the following definition specific for trees which was shown to be equivalent (for trees) by [Kinnersley, 1992]. 

Definition 2.3 (Recursive characterization for trees) . Let T be a tree. Then pw( T ) = 0 if and only if 

T consists of a single vertex. For k ≥ 1, a tree T has pathwidth at most k if and only if, for every vertex x ∈ V (T ), at most two connected components of T \ { x} have pathwidth at least k.

Equivalently, pw( T ) > k if and only if there exists a vertex x ∈ V (T ) such that T \ { x} has at least three connected components of pathwidth at least k.We now define the spine structure used by the algorithm. Informally, a spine is a path whose removal lowers the pathwidth of every remaining component. 5Definition 2.4 (k-spine of a tree) . Let T be a tree with pw( T ) = k. A k-spine of T is a path 

P ⊆ V (T ) such that every connected component of T \ P has pathwidth at most k − 1.

This is the same object as the main path of Suderman [2004], who proved that every tree admits such a path. Hence every tree admits the following recursive decomposition. 

Definition 2.5 (k-spine decomposition) . Let T be a tree with pw( T ) = k. A k-spine decomposition 

is formed by recursively removing spines: first remove a k-spine KT of T , then recursively remove a 

pw( C)-spine from each connected component C of T [V (T ) \ KT ], stopping at singleton components. The removed spines form vertex-disjoint paths whose union is V (T ).

A k-spine decomposition need not be unique. Throughout the paper, the algorithm uses an arbitrary fixed k-spine decomposition; the guarantees in Section 3.2 hold for any such choice. 

# 3 Main Algorithm and Analysis 

3.1 The Algorithm 

We now describe the search algorithm. Fix an arbitrary k-spine decomposition of T . The algorithm maintains a current component Tcur and a current start vertex scur ∈ V (Tcur ). Each phase operates on the spine of the current component. Let P be the spine of Tcur specified by the fixed decomposition. The algorithm begins the phase by projecting scur onto P ; that is, it chooses the closest vertex a ∈ P

to scur .The algorithm then performs exponential search along P starting from a. The oracle answers on 

P have a one-dimensional interpretation. Let x ∈ P be the unique vertex where the path from the target to P meets the spine; if the target lies on P , then x is the target itself. For every queried vertex 

v ∈ P with v̸ = x, the oracle returns the neighbor of v on P in the direction of x. Thus, away from 

x, the search proceeds exactly as one-dimensional exponential search on a path. When the search reaches x, one of two things happens. If the target lies on P , then the oracle returns here and the algorithm terminates. Otherwise, the oracle returns a neighbor y / ∈ P , and the target lies in the unique connected component of Tcur \ P containing y.In the latter case, the algorithm descends into that off-spine component: it sets Tcur to the component of Tcur \ P containing y and sets scur := y. Thus each phase either finds the target on the current spine or identifies the unique lower-pathwidth component containing the target. Since removing a spine reduces the pathwidth of every remaining component by at least one, there are at most k

nontrivial phases. Algorithm 1 gives the full procedure. 

Algorithm 1 k-Spine Exponential Search 

Require: Tree T , fixed k-spine decomposition, prediction s, direction oracle dir  

> 1:

Tcur ← T , scur ← s 

> 2:

while Tcur is not a singleton do  

> 3:

Let P be the spine of Tcur in the decomposition  

> 4:

Let a be the closest vertex of P to scur  

> 5:

Run exponential search on P from a until either here is returned or the oracle points off P 

> 6:

if the target is found on P then  

> 7:

return the target  

> 8:

else  

> 9:

Let x ∈ P be the vertex where the oracle points off the spine  

> 10:

Let y / ∈ P be the oracle answer at x 

> 11:

Let C be the component of Tcur \ P containing y 

> 12:

Tcur ← C, scur ← y 

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end while  

> 15:

return the unique vertex of Tcur 

63.2 Analysis 

We now prove that Algorithm 1 satisfies Theorem 1.3. Namely, the algorithm correctly outputs the target vertex and uses at most O(k log dist( s, t )) oracle queries, where k = pw( T ). We prove correctness in Section 3.2.1 and query complexity in Section 3.2.2. 

3.2.1 Correctness 

We first prove that Algorithm 1 always returns the hidden target. 

Lemma 3.1. Algorithm 1 returns the target vertex. Proof. Let t denote the hidden target. We prove the following invariant: at the beginning of every iteration of the while loop, t ∈ V (Tcur ). The invariant holds initially because Tcur = T .Now consider an arbitrary iteration and assume that t ∈ V (Tcur ). Let P be the spine of Tcur . Since 

Tcur is a tree and P is connected, there is a unique vertex x ∈ P closest to t. Equivalently, x is the unique vertex of P at which the path from t to P meets the spine. If t ∈ P , then x = t. Otherwise, x

is the unique vertex of P whose off-spine component contains t.We claim that exponential search on P , started from the anchor a, correctly identifies x. For any queried vertex v ∈ P , the oracle returns the neighbor of v on the unique v-to-t path, unless v = t, in which case it returns here . Thus every vertex of P on either side of x points along the spine toward 

x. At x, the oracle either returns here , if x = t, or returns the unique neighbor y / ∈ P on the x-to-t

path. Therefore the oracle answers along P have exactly the one-dimensional structure needed by exponential search: the search either finds t on P , or identifies the unique vertex x ∈ P where the path to t leaves the spine. If the target is found on P , the algorithm returns t, so the output is correct. Otherwise, the oracle answer at x is a vertex y / ∈ P on the unique x-to-t path. Hence t lies in the connected component C

of Tcur \ P containing y. The algorithm sets 

Tcur ← C and scur ← y, 

so the invariant is preserved. It remains to show that the algorithm terminates. Whenever the algorithm does not return during an iteration, it descends into a component of Tcur \ P . By the definition of the recursive spine decomposition, every such component has pathwidth strictly smaller than that of Tcur . Therefore each descent strictly decreases the pathwidth of the current component. Since pathwidth is a nonnegative integer, after finitely many descents the algorithm reaches a component of pathwidth 0, which is a singleton. By the invariant, that single vertex must be t, and the final line of the algorithm returns it. 

3.2.2 Query Complexity 

We now bound the number of oracle queries made by Algorithm 1. 

Theorem 3.2. Algorithm 1 makes O(k log D) oracle queries, where k = pw( T ) and D =dist T (s, t ).Proof. Consider an arbitrary phase of the algorithm. Let Tcur be the current component, let scur be the current start vertex, and let P be the spine of Tcur . Let a be the closest vertex of P to scur .By Lemma 3.1, the target t lies in Tcur at the beginning of the phase. Let x ∈ P be the unique vertex of P closest to t. Equivalently, x is the vertex of P at which the path from t to P meets the spine; if 

t ∈ P , then x = t.The cost of the phase is the cost of exponential search on the path P , starting from a, until it identifies 

x or finds the target. By the standard analysis of exponential search on a path, this takes 

O log(dist P (a, x )) 

queries. 7We next relate dist P (a, x ) to the original prediction error D. Since a is the projection of scur onto P

and x is the projection of t onto P , the unique scur -to-t path in the tree contains the subpath of P

from a to x. Hence 

dist P (a, x ) ≤ dist T (scur , t ).

Moreover, scur never moves farther from the target. Initially scur = s. Whenever the algorithm updates scur , it sets it to a vertex y on the current scur -to-t path. Therefore 

dist T (scur , t ) ≤ dist T (s, t ) = D. 

Thus every phase uses at most O log( D) queries. It remains to bound the number of phases. Whenever the algorithm does not terminate during a phase, it descends into a component of Tcur \ P . After this update, all later queries are made inside this component, so the algorithm never returns to the removed spine P . Since P is the spine of Tcur in the fixed spine decomposition, every such component has pathwidth strictly smaller than pw( Tcur ).Thus the pathwidth of the current component decreases by at least one after every descent. Since the initial pathwidth is k, there are at most k nontrivial spine-search phases. Multiplying the per-phase bound by the number of phases gives O k log D queries in total. 

3.2.3 Proof of the Main Upper Bound 

We can now combine correctness and query complexity. 

Theorem 1.3. There is a deterministic algorithm for the Search on Trees problem which, when given a tree T = ( V, E ) of pathwidth k and a prediction s ∈ V , finds the unknown target t ∈ V using at most O(k log dist( s, t )) queries. Proof. The result follows immediately from Lemma 3.1 and Theorem 3.2. 

# 4 Experiments 

We empirically evaluate the oracle-query complexity of k-spine search on tree instances derived from real-world networks. Since our theoretical guarantees are stated in terms of oracle queries, the main performance measure is the average number of oracle queries. Given a tree T = ( V, E ), a prediction ˆp ∈ V , a target p ∈ V , and pathwidth pw( T ) = k, we compare three algorithms: centroid search, k-spine search, and naive trace. Centroid search is prediction-agnostic and repeatedly queries a centroid of the current feasible subtree, giving worst-case query complexity O(log |V (T )|). k-spine search is Algorithm 1, implemented using a fixed k-spine decomposition. Naive trace starts at ˆp and follows the oracle direction until reaching p, using exactly dist T (ˆ p, p ) + 1 queries. Implementation details, including a constant-factor initialization heuristic, are deferred to Appendix C. The relevant prediction error is d := dist T (ˆ p, p ). The analysis of k-spine search suggests a leading dependence of the form k log d, while centroid search has worst-case query complexity O(log |V (T )|).Equating these terms gives the coarse reference scale 

k log d ≈ log |V (T )|, or equivalently d ≈ | V (T )|1/k .

This scale should not be interpreted as an exact prediction of the empirical crossing point. In the experiments, centroid search is run on the actual tree instances and sampled prediction–target pairs, and its average query cost can be smaller than the worst-case upper bound because of the structure of the tree and the sampled target distribution. Thus the main empirical question is whether k-spine search beats both the actual centroid baseline and the naive trace baseline over a meaningful range of prediction errors. 

4.1 Real-world tree instances 

The input graphs are taken from the Network Repository [Rossi and Ahmed, 2015]: the Luxembourg road network, the sc-msdoor scientific-computing graph, and two Orkut social-network instances. We convert each graph to a DFS spanning tree rooted at a low-degree peripheral vertex; for directed graphs, we first take the underlying undirected largest connected component. This root is used only 8Figure 1: Zoomed pre-crossing results. The shaded region marks distances where k-spine search uses fewer average oracle queries than both baselines. for tree construction, not as the prediction. For each tree, we evaluate at fixed prediction error d by uniformly sampling ordered pairs (ˆ p, p ) with dist T (ˆ p, p ) = d. We run all algorithms on the same pairs and report average oracle queries conditioned on d. Additional sampling details appear in Appendix C.1. Table 1 summarizes the instances and empirical crossover behavior. The column |V (T )|1/k reports the coarse worst-case comparison scale above. The column “ k-spine wins” records the sampled distance interval on which k-spine search has lower average query complexity than both baselines. The empirical crossing is the estimated distance at which the k-spine and centroid curves meet.                                  

> Dataset |V(T)|k|V(T)|1/k k-spine wins Crossing Luxembourg road network 114 ,599 510 .28 d= 10 –22 23 .0
> sc-msdoor 404 ,785 68.60 d= 10 –43 43 .6
> soc-orkut-dir 3,072 ,441 519 .84 d= 10 –53 53 .7
> soc-orkut 2,997 ,166 519 .74 d= 10 –67 68 .0

Table 1: Summary of the real-world DFS tree instances. Prediction–target pairs are uniformly sampled among ordered pairs at fixed tree distance d. The scale |V (T )|1/k is a coarse worst-case reference obtained by comparing k log d with log |V (T )|. The win range is the sampled interval on which k-spine search uses fewer average oracle queries than both naive trace and centroid search. Figure 1 shows the pre-crossing regime. The shaded region marks the sampled distances for which 

k-spine search has lower average oracle-query complexity than both naive trace and centroid search. Full-range plots over the entire sampled distance range are deferred to Appendix C.2. Across all four datasets, k-spine search exhibits a clear intermediate-distance advantage. For very small d, naive trace is difficult to beat: it has essentially no setup cost and uses exactly dist T (ˆ p, p ) + 1 

queries, while our implementation of k-spine search incurs a small initial overhead before beginning the spine search. For very large d, centroid search becomes competitive because its cost is essentially independent of the prediction. Between these regimes, k-spine search uses the prediction while avoiding the linear growth of naive trace, and it achieves the lowest average query complexity over a nontrivial interval in every instance. The initial overhead is small in all experiments and does not affect the asymptotic guarantees. 9The empirical crossings are later than the coarse |V (T )|1/k reference scale in all four instances: 23 .0

versus 10 .28 on Luxembourg, 43 .6 versus 8.60 on sc-msdoor, and 53 .7, 68 .0 versus roughly 20 on the two Orkut instances. These crossings should not be read as precise validations of a worst-case threshold, since centroid search is evaluated on the actual trees and significantly outperforms its worst-case bound in these experiments. Rather, the result is stronger than merely beating a theoretical upper bound: k-spine search remains below the actual centroid baseline over a substantial range of prediction errors, while also outperforming naive trace once the error is no longer very small. 10 References 

Priyank Agrawal, Eric Balkanski, Vasilis Gkatzelis, Tingting Ou, and Xizhi Tan. Learning-augmented mechanism design: Leveraging predictions for facility location. Math. Oper. Res. , 49(4):2626–2651, 2024. doi: 10.1287/ MOOR.2022.0225. URL https://doi.org/10.1287/moor.2022.0225 .Étienne Bamas, Andreas Maggiori, and Ola Svensson. The primal-dual method for learning augmented algo-rithms. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual , 2020. URL https://proceedings. neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/e834cb114d33f729dbc9c7fb0c6bb607-Abstract.html .Jon Louis Bentley and Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. An almost optimal algorithm for unbounded searching. Information Processing Letters , 5(3):82–87, 1976. ISSN 0020-0190. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0020-0190(76)90071-5. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0020019076900715 .Benjamin Aram Berendsohn, Ishay Golinsky, Haim Kaplan, and László Kozma. Fast Approximation of Search Trees on Trees with Centroid Trees. In Kousha Etessami, Uriel Feige, and Gabriele Puppis, editors, 50th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2023) , volume 261 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs) , pages 19:1–19:20, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2023. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. ISBN 978-3-95977-278-5. doi: 10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2023.19. URL https://drops.dagstuhl.de/entities/document/10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2023.19 .Michael Dinitz, Sungjin Im, Thomas Lavastida, Benjamin Moseley, and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Faster match-ings via learned duals. In Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: An-nual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual , pages 10393–10406, 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/ 5616060fb8ae85d93f334e7267307664-Abstract.html .Michael Dinitz, Sungjin Im, Thomas Lavastida, Benjamin Moseley, Aidin Niaparast, and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Binary search with distributional predictions. In Amir Globersons, Lester Mackey, Danielle Belgrave, Angela Fan, Ulrich Paquet, Jakub M. Tomczak, and Cheng Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 - 15, 2024 , 2024. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/ paper/2024/hash/a4b293979b8b521e9222d30c40246911-Abstract-Conference.html .J.A. Ellis, I.H. Sudborough, and J.S. Turner. The vertex separation and search number of a graph. Information and Computation , 113(1):50–79, 1994. ISSN 0890-5401. doi: https://doi.org/10.1006/inco.1994.1064. URL 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0890540184710649 .Ehsan Emamjomeh-Zadeh, David Kempe, and Vikrant Singhal. Deterministic and probabilistic binary search in graphs. In Proceedings of the Forty-Eighth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , STOC ’16, page 519–532, New York, NY, USA, 2016. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450341325. doi: 10.1145/2897518.2897656. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2897518.2897656 .Sungjin Im, Ravi Kumar, Mahshid Montazer Qaem, and Manish Purohit. Online knapsack with fre-quency predictions. In Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: An-nual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual , pages 2733–2743, 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/ 161c5c5ad51fcc884157890511b3c8b0-Abstract.html .Nancy G. Kinnersley. The vertex separation number of a graph equals its path-width. Information Processing Letters , 42(6):345–350, 1992. ISSN 0020-0190. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0020-0190(92)90234-M. URL 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/002001909290234M .Silvio Lattanzi, Thomas Lavastida, Benjamin Moseley, and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Online scheduling via learned weights. In Shuchi Chawla, editor, Proceedings of the 2020 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2020, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, January 5-8, 2020 , pages 1859–1877. SIAM, 2020. doi: 10.1137/1. 9781611975994.114. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611975994.114 .Alexander Lindermayr and Nicole Megow. Algorithms with predictions. https:// algorithms-with-predictions.github.io/ , 2022. Thodoris Lykouris and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Competitive caching with machine learned advice. Journal of the ACM (JACM) , 68(4):1–25, 2021. 

11 Michael Mitzenmacher and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Algorithms with Predictions , page 646–662. Cambridge University Press, 2021. doi: 10.1017/9781108637435.037. Krzysztof Onak and Pawel Parys. Generalization of binary search: Searching in trees and forest-like partial orders. In 2006 47th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS’06) , pages 379–388, 2006. doi: 10.1109/FOCS.2006.32. Manish Purohit, Zoya Svitkina, and Ravi Kumar. Improving online algorithms via ml predictions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 9661–9670, 2018. Neil Robertson and P.D. Seymour. Graph minors. i. excluding a forest. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 35(1):39–61, 1983. ISSN 0095-8956. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0095-8956(83)90079-5. URL 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0095895683900795 .Ryan A. Rossi and Nesreen K. Ahmed. The network data repository with interactive graph analytics and visualization. In AAAI , 2015. URL https://networkrepository.com .Matthew Suderman. Pathwidth and layered drawings of trees. International Journal of Computational Geometry & Applications , 14(03):203–225, 2004. doi: 10.1142/S0218195904001433. URL https://doi.org/10. 1142/S0218195904001433 .Jan van den Brand, Sebastian Forster, Yasamin Nazari, and Adam Polak. On dynamic graph algorithms with predictions. In SODA , pages 3534–3557. SIAM, 2024. Andrew Chi-Chin Yao. Probabilistic computations: Toward a unified measure of complexity. In 18th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (sfcs 1977) , pages 222–227, 1977. doi: 10.1109/SFCS.1977. 24. 

12 A Notation and Preliminaries 

We recall the standard definition of pathwidth [Robertson and Seymour, 1983]: 

Definition A.1 (Path decomposition and pathwidth) . Let G = ( V (G), E (G)) be a graph. A path decomposition of G is a sequence of vertex sets 

B = ( B1, B 2, . . . , B m), Bi ⊆ V (G),

called bags, satisfying the following conditions: 1. Smi=1 Bi = V (G);2. for every edge uv ∈ E(G), there exists an index i such that {u, v } ⊆ Bi;3. for every vertex v ∈ V (G), the set {i : v ∈ Bi} is an interval in {1, . . . , m }.The width of B is max i |Bi| − 1. The pathwidth of G, denoted pw( G), is the minimum width of a path decomposition of G.

This was shown to be equivalent to Definition 2.3 through the relationship between pathwidth and vertex separation [Kinnersley, 1992]. 

# B Lower Bounds 

We now show that the dependence on the pathwidth parameter k in Theorem 1.3 is necessary. We construct a family of trees of pathwidth k and maximum degree at most 3 such that every deterministic or zero-error randomized algorithm has some target requiring Ω( k log dist( s, t )) queries. 

B.1 Hard Instance Construction 

Fix integers k ≥ 1 and ℓ ≥ max {4, k 2}. We recursively define a rooted tree Th,ℓ for each 0 ≤ h ≤ k.The parameter h denotes the remaining height of the construction, so level 0 is the bottom level. For the base case, let T0,ℓ consist of a single vertex r0. For h ≥ 1, construct Th,ℓ as follows. Start with a path 

Ph = ( ph 

> 1

, p h 

> 2

, . . . , p hℓ ).

For each i ∈ { 1, . . . , ℓ }, attach a disjoint copy T (i) 

> h−1,ℓ

of Th−1,ℓ by adding an edge from phi to the root of T (i)

> h−1,ℓ

. The root of Th,ℓ is defined to be 

rh := ph 

> 1

.

By construction, every vertex of Th,ℓ has degree at most 3. The recursive structure of Th,ℓ is illustrated in Figure 2. Next we define the bottom-level target set of the final tree Tk,ℓ . Let 

I := {⌈ ℓ/ 2⌉, ⌈ℓ/ 2⌉ + 1 , . . . , ℓ }.

For a sequence 

α = ( ik, i k−1, . . . , i 1) ∈ Ik,

let vα ∈ V (Tk,ℓ ) be the vertex obtained by descending through the recursive construction according to α. Concretely, starting from the root of Tk,ℓ , we enter the copy of Tk−1,ℓ attached to the vertex pkik .Inside that copy, we then enter the copy of Tk−2,ℓ attached to its vertex pk−1 

> ik−1

, and we continue in this way until reaching a copy of T0,ℓ . Since T0,ℓ consists of a single vertex, this procedure identifies a unique bottom-level vertex vα.We define 

Bk,ℓ := {vα : α ∈ Ik}.

Thus Bk,ℓ is the set of admissible targets, all of which lie at level 0 of the construction. Moreover, 

|Bk,ℓ | = |I|k ≥ (ℓ/ 2) k.

13 Figure 2: Recursive construction of Th,ℓ . The tree consists of a spine Ph = ( ph 

> 1

, . . . , p hℓ ), with a disjoint copy of Th−1,ℓ attached to every spine vertex. The base case T0,ℓ is a single vertex r0.

Figure 3: Illustration of the target-set construction for the hard instance, shown here for k = 3 and 

ℓ = 5 . At each recursive level, one chooses an attachment index in I = {3, 4, 5}. A sequence 

α = ( i3, i 2, i 1) ∈ I3 determines a unique bottom-level vertex vα. In general, each α ∈ Ik determines one target in Bk,ℓ , so |Bk,ℓ | = |I|k.14 Figure 3 illustrates how a sequence α ∈ Ik determines a unique bottom-level target. The hard instance is the tree Tk,ℓ with prediction fixed to be 

s := rk = pk 

> 1

,

the left endpoint of the top-level spine. The unknown target is promised to lie in the bottom-level target set Bk,ℓ .Intuitively, Th,ℓ consists of a spine on ℓ vertices, with a copy of Th−1,ℓ attached to every spine vertex. A target is specified by making one attachment choice from I at each of the k recursive levels. After 

k such choices, the process reaches a bottom-level copy of T0,ℓ , which consists of a single vertex. Hence there are Θ( ℓ) choices at each of k levels, and therefore 

|Bk,ℓ | = |I|k = Θ( ℓk).

We first verify that this construction has the desired pathwidth. 

Lemma B.1 (Pathwidth of the construction) . For every h ≥ 0, the tree Th,ℓ has pathwidth exactly h.Proof. We prove the claim by induction on h. The case h = 0 is immediate, since T0,ℓ is a single vertex. First, we prove the upper bound. Assume inductively that pw( Th−1,ℓ ) = h − 1. For each attached copy T (i)

> h−1,ℓ

, take a path decomposition of width h − 1 and add the attachment vertex phi to every bag. This increases the width by at most one, so the resulting bags have width at most h. Moreover, these bags cover the attachment edge from phi to the root of T (i)

> h−1,ℓ

.Let Di denote this modified path decomposition of the ith attached copy. Concatenate the decomposi-tions in the order 

D1, {ph 

> 1

, p h 

> 2

}, D2, {ph 

> 2

, p h 

> 3

}, . . . , {phℓ−1, p hℓ }, Dℓ.

This is a valid path decomposition of Th,ℓ . Every edge inside an attached copy is covered by the corresponding Di, every attachment edge is covered because phi was added to all bags of Di, and every edge of Ph is covered by one of the two-vertex bags. The contiguity condition also holds: each vertex inside an attached copy appears only inside its copy’s decomposition, while each spine vertex 

phi appears only in Di and in the adjacent path-edge bags. Therefore, 

pw( Th,ℓ ) ≤ h. 

It remains to prove the lower bound. Choose an internal vertex phi of Ph, with 2 ≤ i ≤ ℓ − 1.Removing phi creates three connected components: one containing the left side of Ph, one containing the right side of Ph, and the attached copy T (i)

> h−1,ℓ

. Each of these three components contains a copy of Th−1,ℓ , and hence each has pathwidth at least h − 1 by the induction hypothesis and monotonicity of pathwidth under taking subgraphs. We use the standard three-component obstruction for pathwidth on trees: if deleting a vertex of a tree leaves at least three connected components of pathwidth at least r, then the tree has pathwidth at least r + 1 . This follows from the recursive characterization of pathwidth on trees, equivalently from the vertex-separation characterization [Kinnersley, 1992, Ellis et al., 1994]. Applying this with 

r = h − 1 gives 

pw( Th,ℓ ) ≥ h. 

Combining the upper and lower bounds gives pw( Th,ℓ ) = h.We next relate ℓ to the distance between the prediction and every possible target. 

Lemma B.2 (Prediction error in the construction) . For every target t ∈ Bk,ℓ ,

dist Tk,ℓ (s, t ) = Θ( kℓ ).

Consequently, since ℓ ≥ k2,

log dist Tk,ℓ (s, t ) = Θ(log ℓ).

15 Proof. By the definition of Bk,ℓ , every target t ∈ Bk,ℓ is a bottom-level vertex indexed by a sequence 

α = ( ik, i k−1, . . . , i 1) ∈ Ik.

At level j, the path from the root of the current copy of Tj,ℓ to the next lower-level copy moves along the current spine from pj 

> 1

to pjij and then takes the attachment edge into the chosen copy of Tj−1,ℓ .The distance along the spine is ij − 1, and the attachment edge contributes one additional edge, so level j contributes exactly ij edges. Therefore, 

dist Tk,ℓ (s, t ) = 

> k

X

> j=1

ij .

Since each ij ∈ I, we have ℓ/ 2 ≤ ij ≤ ℓ. Hence 

kℓ 

2 ≤ dist Tk,ℓ (s, t ) ≤ kℓ. 

Thus dist Tk,ℓ (s, t ) = Θ( kℓ ). Since ℓ ≥ k2, we have k ≤ √ℓ, and therefore 

log ℓ ≤ log( kℓ ) ≤ log( ℓ3/2) = 32 log ℓ. 

Thus log( kℓ ) = Θ(log ℓ), which proves the second claim. We now prove a distributional decision-tree lower bound for the uniform distribution over the bottom-level targets. 

Lemma B.3 (Distributional decision-tree lower bound) . Let μ be the uniform distribution over Bk,ℓ .For every deterministic correct search algorithm A,

Et∼μ[QA(t)] = Ω( k log ℓ),

where QA(t) denotes the number of oracle queries made by A when the target is t.Proof. Let 

N := |Bk,ℓ |.

Restricted to targets in Bk,ℓ , the deterministic algorithm A induces a decision tree. Since Tk,ℓ has maximum degree at most 3, each oracle query has at most four possible outcomes: the answer here 

or one of at most three neighboring vertices. Hence this decision tree has branching factor at most 4.For each target t ∈ Bk,ℓ , let dt be the depth of the leaf reached by A on target t. Since A is correct on every target, distinct targets in Bk,ℓ must reach distinct leaves; otherwise the same transcript would force the same output on two different targets. Moreover, 

QA(t) = dt.

We lower bound the average leaf depth by a simple counting argument. The case N < 16 is absorbed into the constant in the Ω( ·) notation, so assume N ≥ 16 . Since the decision tree has branching factor at most 4, the number of leaves of depth at most q is at most 

> q

X

> i=0

4i = 4q+1 − 13 ≤ 4q+1 .

Choose 

q := ⌊log 4 N ⌋ − 2.

Then 

4q+1 ≤ N

4 .

Thus at most N/ 4 targets in Bk,ℓ can reach leaves of depth at most q. Consequently, at least 3N/ 4

targets have leaf depth greater than q.16 Since μ is the uniform distribution on Bk,ℓ , we obtain 

Et∼μ[QA(t)] = 1

N

X

> t∈Bk,ℓ

dt ≥ 34 q = Ω(log N ).

Using N = |Bk,ℓ | = |I|k ≥ (ℓ/ 2) k, this gives 

Et∼μ[QA(t)] = Ω(log |Bk,ℓ |) = Ω( k log ℓ),

where the last equality uses ℓ ≥ 4.We are now ready to prove the lower bound. 

Theorem 1.4. There is no algorithm (deterministic or randomized) for the Search on Trees problem that has expected query complexity o(k log dist (s, t )) for every tree T = ( V, E ) of pathwidth k,prediction s ∈ V , and target t ∈ V .Proof. Fix k ≥ 1 and ℓ ≥ max {4, k 2}, and consider the hard instance Tk,ℓ with prediction s = rk.By Lemma B.1, this tree has pathwidth k.For deterministic algorithms, Lemma B.3 implies that under the uniform distribution on Bk,ℓ , the average query cost is Ω( k log ℓ). Therefore, for every deterministic correct search algorithm A, there exists some target t ∈ Bk,ℓ on which A makes Ω( k log ℓ) queries. For randomized algorithms, we assume the algorithm must always output the correct target, and its query complexity is the expected number of oracle queries over its internal randomness. By Yao’s minimax principle [Yao, 1977], 

min  

> R

max 

> t∈Bk,ℓ

Eρ

QRρ (t) ≥ min  

> A

Et∼μ

QA(t),

where R ranges over zero-error randomized algorithms, ρ denotes the internal randomness of R,and A ranges over deterministic correct search algorithms. By Lemma B.3, the right-hand side is 

Ω( k log ℓ). Hence, for every zero-error randomized algorithm R, there exists a target t ∈ Bk,ℓ such that 

Eρ

QRρ (t) = Ω( k log ℓ),

with the tree Tk,ℓ and prediction s = rk fixed. Finally, by Lemma B.2, every target t ∈ Bk,ℓ satisfies 

log dist Tk,ℓ (s, t ) = Θ(log ℓ).

Thus the hard target guaranteed above satisfies 

Eρ

QRρ (t) = Ω  k log dist Tk,ℓ (s, t ).

The deterministic statement follows identically without the expectation over ρ. Hence no deterministic or zero-error randomized algorithm can guarantee o(k log dist( s, t )) expected query complexity on every tree of pathwidth k, prediction s, and target t.Finally, we show that Theorem 1.4 implies the statement of Theorem 1.2. 

Theorem 1.2. There is no algorithm (deterministic or randomized) for the Search on Trees problem that has expected query complexity O(log dist( s, t )) for every prediction s ∈ V and target t ∈ V .Proof. Suppose, for contradiction, that there exists an algorithm for Search on Trees with expected query complexity 

O(log dist( s, t )) 

for every tree T , every prediction s ∈ V (T ), and every target t ∈ V (T ). In particular, this guarantee would hold on the hard instances Tk,ℓ from Section B.1, for every choice of k.Choose any non-constant sequence of pathwidths k → ∞ . On the corresponding hard instances, the assumed guarantee gives 

O(log dist( s, t )) = o k log dist( s, t ).

This contradicts Theorem 1.4, which states that no deterministic or zero-error randomized algorithm can guarantee o(k log dist( s, t )) expected query complexity on all trees of pathwidth k.Therefore, no universal O(log dist( s, t )) expected-query guarantee is possible for Search on Trees. 17 C Experiments 

We use one implementation optimization that improves constants but does not affect the asymptotic guarantees. Instead of always starting from the top-level spine, the algorithm first queries the prediction ˆp. If the oracle returns here , the algorithm terminates. Otherwise, the oracle answer identifies the neighbor of ˆp on the unique path to the target, and hence certifies which side of ˆp

contains the target. The implementation then starts the spine-search procedure from the lowest decomposition component consistent with this certified direction, rather than from the root of the decomposition. Intuitively, this skips high-level components that cannot contain the target. In our implementation, this component is found by searching upward through the decomposition hierarchy. This optimization can reduce unnecessary high-level spine searches in practice, but it does not affect correctness: the algorithm only skips components certified not to contain the target. It also does not change the asymptotic query-complexity guarantees of Algorithm 1. The optimization introduces a small initial overhead because the prediction is queried before the recursive spine procedure begins. This explains why, at very small prediction error, naive trace can be slightly better: naive trace has almost no setup cost and uses exactly dist T (ˆ p, p ) + 1 oracle queries. The overhead is small in all experiments and is dominated once the prediction error leaves this very local regime. 

C.1 Experimental Details 

For each resulting tree T = ( V, E ), we evaluate performance at fixed tree distance. For a distance d,define 

Pd := {(ˆ p, p ) ∈ V (T ) × V (T ) : dist T (ˆ p, p ) = d}.

We uniformly sample ordered pairs (ˆ p, p ) from Pd, treat ˆp as the prediction and p as the target, and run all three algorithms on the same sampled pairs. Thus the x-axis in the plots is the prediction error 

d, and the y-axis is the average number of oracle queries conditioned on that error. 

C.2 Full-range plots 

Figure 4 shows the full-range results over the sampled distance range. These plots use a logarithmic 

x-axis to display behavior across both small and large prediction errors. They illustrate the large-scale qualitative behavior: naive trace grows with the prediction error, while centroid search and k-spine search remain substantially flatter. 

# D Computing k-Spine 

We briefly describe the preprocessing step used to compute the recursive spine decomposition. This step is not central to our contribution: our main results concern the number of oracle queries once such a decomposition is available. We therefore use a standard exact tree pathwidth routine as a preprocessing subroutine, rather than optimizing this part of the implementation. Our implementation is based on the classical characterization of tree pathwidth via vertex separation, together with the EST labeling procedure for trees [Ellis et al., 1994]. Since vertex separation is equivalent to pathwidth, the EST labels allow us to compute the exact pathwidth of each tree component. For each connected component in the recursive decomposition, we root the component at a chosen vertex and compute EST labels bottom-up. These labels identify the bottleneck pathwidth levels in the rooted subtrees and provide enough information to recover a canonical backbone path. We use this backbone as the current spine. Removing this spine leaves connected components of strictly smaller pathwidth, and we recursively apply the same procedure to each remaining component. Equivalently, one can view this as an implementation of the following straightforward exact procedure. For a connected subtree T ′, compute its pathwidth level k′ = pw( T ′). Then find a path P such that every connected component of T ′ \ P has pathwidth at most k′ − 1. The path P becomes the spine at the current node of the decomposition tree, and the algorithm recurses on the components of T ′ \ P .The preprocessing runs in polynomial time. At each recursive level, the current components are disjoint subtrees of the original tree, so the total number of vertices processed at that level is at most 18 Figure 4: Full-range results on real-world DFS tree instances. Top row: Luxembourg road network and sc-msdoor. Bottom row: soc-orkut-dir and soc-orkut. Naive trace grows with the prediction error, while centroid search and k-spine search remain substantially flatter on this scale. 

n. Moreover, the recursion depth is at most pw( T ), since the pathwidth level decreases by at least one after each spine removal. For trees, pw( T ) = O(log |V |), so there are at most logarithmically many recursive levels. Since the underlying EST vertex-separation routine runs in polynomial time on trees, the full preprocessing procedure is polynomial-time as well. We emphasize that this preprocessing is used only to construct the decomposition before running the search algorithm. The focus of the paper is the query complexity of prediction-based search on the resulting decomposition, not the optimization of the decomposition routine itself. 

# E Experimental Setup 

All experiments are conducted in Python 3.13.9 on a 16-inch MacBook Pro equipped with an Apple M2 Pro chip, consisting of a 12-core CPU with 8 performance cores and 4 efficiency cores, 16 GB of unified memory, and 512 GB of storage, running macOS Tahoe version 26.4.1. We emphasize that our primary metric is oracle-query complexity, which is hardware-independent; the hardware specification is reported only for reproducibility of the implementation-level experiments. 19